README.md, before:

# VIP Design System

Design system components used throughout VIP.

[Storybook Components](https://vip-design-system-components.netlify.app/)

## Development

### Prerequisites

Make sure you have [node.js](https://nodejs.org/) and [NPM](https://docs.npmjs.com/getting-started/what-is-npm) installed. Here's a [handy installer](https://nodejs.org/download/) for Windows, Mac, and Linux.

### Install

To get setup run the following command in the `vip-design-system` directory:

```
npm install
```

### Watching for changes

You can build it continuously so that every time you make a change, build files are automatically updated:

```
npm run watch
```

### Testing

We can test two ways:

**Storybook**

For components that include storybooks, we can run `npm run storybook` to view the components in a sandbox-ed storybook environment.

**npm link**

1. Run `npm link` in your checkout of this repo.
2. Spin up a local copy of [the VIP Dashboard](https://github.com/automattic/vip-ui) and navigate to a page using the linked components from `@automattic/vip-design-system`

Note: it's super useful to run `npm run watch` in another process, so any changes will be almost immediately available / testable.

### Updating the Theme with VIP Design System Tokens

You need to update the tokens once the VIP Design System updates the core files.

#### How the theming works

We use the VIP Design System Tokens as our base theme structure. All colors, spaces, types should come from a dynamic token system provided by the VIP Design team, currently using Figma as the design software. When the design system is updated by the Design team, they push a file to the root of this repository: `tokens/valet-core.json`.

By using the [Token Transformer](https://docs.tokens.studio/sync/github#7-how-to-use-tokens-stored-in-github-in-development) and a custom npm script, we parse this file getting only the VIP Dashboard theme we need for the react components. The theme is called: `productive-color-wpvip`.

Once the new file is updated, we need to generate a custom theme file in `src/generated/valet-theme.json`. This operation generates a small json file with the colors we need already filled in.

Once the theme is updated, the file `src/system/theme/index.js` reads the colors and apply to all components.

Use the section below to run the script and update the theme.

_Important:_ If you change the `generated/valet-theme.json`, make it sure to open a new pull request with these changes and release a new version if needed.

#### Update theme script

Run this command to update the VIP Valet Theme with the latest `tokens/valet-core.json`.

```bash
npm run theme-update
```

### Publish NPM Package Instructions

Once all the changes needed are merged to trunk, and you are ready to release a new version, follow these steps:

1. Make sure you have NPM access to our @automattic organization. Ask for #vip-platform-pâtisserie help in case you need it.
2. Pull all the changes to your local trunk. Make sure you have the latest trunk locally.
3. We follow the [https://semver.org/](https://semver.org/) versioning. You should run the specific version you are trying to publish:

```bash
npm version major|minor|patch
```

4. You should see a version bump in the `package.json` file.
5. Build the application:

```bash
npm run build
```

6. Publish the application

```
npm publish
```

Note: You need to have two-factor enabled in your npm account. The publish command will request a two-factor code to complete the publishing process.

7. Push the tags to the repository and trunk updates.

```
git push --tags
git push origin trunk
```

8. For major versions or breaking changes, it's recommended to [create a RELEASE](https://github.com/Automattic/vip-design-system/releases) with the published tag.

### Troubleshooting

### Dialog + Dropdown usage

If you are facing a Dialog overlaping a Dropdown content, add this CSS to your application:

```css
div[data-radix-popper-content-wrapper][data-aria-hidden='true'] {
	opacity: 0;
}
```

Commit message:

Add the ability to export dark-mode and light-mode to different files

README.md, after:

# VIP Design System

Design system components used throughout VIP.

[Storybook Components](https://vip-design-system-components.netlify.app/)

## Development

### Prerequisites

Make sure you have [node.js](https://nodejs.org/) and [NPM](https://docs.npmjs.com/getting-started/what-is-npm) installed. Here's a [handy installer](https://nodejs.org/download/) for Windows, Mac, and Linux.

### Install

To get setup run the following command in the `vip-design-system` directory:

```
npm install
```

### Watching for changes

You can build it continuously so that every time you make a change, build files are automatically updated:

```
npm run watch
```

### Testing

We can test two ways:

**Storybook**

For components that include storybooks, we can run `npm run storybook` to view the components in a sandbox-ed storybook environment.

**npm link**

1. Run `npm link` in your checkout of this repo.
2. Spin up a local copy of [the VIP Dashboard](https://github.com/automattic/vip-ui) and navigate to a page using the linked components from `@automattic/vip-design-system`

Note: it's super useful to run `npm run watch` in another process, so any changes will be almost immediately available / testable.

### Updating the Theme with VIP Design System Tokens

You need to update the tokens once the VIP Design System updates the core files.

#### How the theming works

We use the VIP Design System Tokens as our base theme structure. All colors, spaces, types should come from a dynamic token system provided by the VIP Design team, currently using Figma as the design software. When the design system is updated by the Design team, they push a file to the root of this repository: `tokens/valet-core.json`.

By using the [Token Transformer](https://docs.tokens.studio/sync/github#7-how-to-use-tokens-stored-in-github-in-development) and a custom npm script, we parse this file getting only the VIP Dashboard theme we need for the react components. The light theme is called: `wpvip-productive-color`, and the dark theme is called `wpvip-productive-color-dark`.

Once the new file is updated, we need to generate a custom theme file in `src/generated/valet-theme-light.json`. This operation generates a small json file with the colors we need already filled in.

Once the theme is updated, the file `src/system/theme/index.js` reads the colors and apply to all components.

Use the section below to run the script and update the theme.

_Important:_ If you change the `generated/valet-theme.json`, make it sure to open a new pull request with these changes and release a new version if needed.

#### Update theme script

Run this command to update the VIP Valet Theme with the latest `tokens/**` files.

```bash
npm run theme-update
```

### Publish NPM Package Instructions

Once all the changes needed are merged to trunk, and you are ready to release a new version, follow these steps:

1. Make sure you have NPM access to our @automattic organization. Ask for #vip-platform-pâtisserie help in case you need it.
2. Pull all the changes to your local trunk. Make sure you have the latest trunk locally.
3. We follow the [https://semver.org/](https://semver.org/) versioning. You should run the specific version you are trying to publish:

```bash
npm version major|minor|patch
```

4. You should see a version bump in the `package.json` file.
5. Build the application:

```bash
npm run build
```

6. Publish the application

```
npm publish
```

Note: You need to have two-factor enabled in your npm account. The publish command will request a two-factor code to complete the publishing process.

7. Push the tags to the repository and trunk updates.

```
git push --tags
git push origin trunk
```

8. For major versions or breaking changes, it's recommended to [create a RELEASE](https://github.com/Automattic/vip-design-system/releases) with the published tag.

### Troubleshooting

### Dialog + Dropdown usage

If you are facing a Dialog overlaping a Dropdown content, add this CSS to your application:

```css
div[data-radix-popper-content-wrapper][data-aria-hidden='true'] {
	opacity: 0;
}
```
